
By solving from the first-order condition (6.28) and substituting it in
the second first-order condition (6.29) we obtain:

$\beta^{t}\frac{1}{C_{t}} = \beta^{t + 1}\frac{1}{C_{t + 1}}(1 + R_{t + 1})$
(6.31)

and by operating it results that:

C_(t + 1) = β(1 + R_(t + 1))C_(t) (6.32)

As we can see, the optimal path of consumption of the individual is
totally independent of both the social security contribution tax and the
amount of the pension once he is retired. The explanation is simple. In
a context of perfect foresight, where the agent knows all the future
variables, the social security contributions are perfect substitutes for
private savings. This means that if the government changes social
security contributions, agents react by altering their private saving
decision, in order to maintain their consumption at their optimum level.
However, if leisure is considered in the utility function, changes in
the social security contributions would be distortionary, as the social
security tax will affect the optimal labor supply decision.

+:-----------------------------------:+:------------------------------------------------------------------------:+
| Solution to the problem of the consumer with social security                                                   |
|                                                                                                                |
| Logarithmic utility function                                                                                   |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Optimal consumption path            | C_(t + 1) = β(1 + R_(t))C_(t)                                            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Financial assets                    | B_(t) = (1 + R_(t − 1))B_(t − 1) + (1 − τ_(t)^(ss))W_(t) + D_(t) − C_(t) |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+

6.4.1. Numerical solution

Next, we proceed to the numerical resolution of the previous exercise.
Figure 6.5 shows the spreadsheet "ICM-6-3.xls", in which we have solved
the previous problem. For this, as previously, we have to give values to
the parameters and exogenous variables of the model. The model has only
one parameter: the discount rate. Additionally, the model has four
exogenous variables: real interest rate, wage income, type of social
security contributions and retirement pension.

Let's assume that β = 0.97 appears in cell "B4". The interest rate is
fixed to be 5% (R = 0.05) and the tax rate for social security is 36%
(τ_(t)^(ss) = 0.36), which are in cells "B7" and "B8", respectively. On
the other hand, we have to decide how the individual receives his
pension. Once the individual retires, they have access to the pension
fund. We can make two assumptions. That the individual charges in full
the amount of the pension fund at the moment of retirement, or that the
pension fund is distributed in some way throughout the remaining life of
the individual. In our case, we are going to choose the first option.
Thus, we observe that when the agent retires, with the used data, the
pension fund has a total of 246.3 consumption units.

[]

Figure 6.5. Structure of the spreadsheet "ICM-6-3.xls". Social Security
system.

Figure 6.6 shows the time path of the relevant variables (dash line). In
the first place, we observe that the consumption path continues to have
a positive slope. This is so, because as we have seen previously, the
optimal path of consumption of the individual is not affected either by
social security contributions or by the way in which pensions are
received. This means that a social security system of capitalization has
no effect on the individual's decisions regarding consumption period by
period. This is due to the fact that social security contributions imply
the existence of forced saving, which is a perfect substitute for
voluntary savings. Therefore, changes in the social security system only
cause changes in the voluntary savings of the individual, without
affecting their level of consumption. The optimal path of savings is now
different as a result of the social security scheme. As we can see, the
savings now are negative, and of a very high amount, during the working
life of the agent. This is because the individual is replacing voluntary
savings with the mandatory savings derived from social security
contributions. Given the optimal path of consumption that the individual
wants to follow, social security contributions represent a very large
volume of savings, which will compensate through changes in voluntary
savings. At the time of retirement, there is a balance in the stock of
financial assets, because we are assuming that the individual receives
all the pension once and only devotes a small fraction of it to
consumption in that period. As of this moment, the stock of financial
assets is decreasing (the agent is consuming the pension received, until
in the final period, the stock of financial assets is zero.) The pension
fund shows the contributions that the individual makes period by period
during their working time, together with the profitability that is
generated. This fund is increased until the moment in which the
retirement takes place. From that moment, and given the assumption that
we have made, the pension fund is null. In summary, in this social
security system, we see that the compulsory savings of the system are a
perfect substitute for the private savings, indicating that given a
certain level of mandatory savings, the individual will adjust their
private savings so that the path of consumption is the one that
maximizes their welfare.

6.4.2. Change in social security contributions

Suppose now that the government increases the social security
contributions. For example, let's assume that quotes increase up to 40%.
What implications does this change have on the agent's decisions? The
results are shown in Figure 6.6, by the continuous line. As we can see,
the optimal path of consumption of the individual remains the same,
since it is not affected by this tax in terms of social security
contributions. However, now the level of savings (voluntary) is
different, adjusting to the new level of mandatory savings. Thus, while
the pension fund increases with respect to the previous situation,
voluntary savings decrease, so that given the new disposable income, the
social security contributions’ net, the level of consumption will be the
same. What we are observing in this exercise is a perfect substitution
between voluntary savings and forced savings derived from a social
security system. Given the assumption that the return on both financial
assets is the same, both types of savings are perfectly substitutes.

Different would be the case of a pay-as-you-go social security system,
where contributions to social security go directly to pay the pensions
of those who are retired, and the future pension of an agent who is in
his working life depends on the contributions to the system made by
future workers. In this type of system, the future pension will depend
on the population dynamics and the evolution of labor productivity, so
that voluntary savings would not be a substitute for social security
contributions.

[]

Figure 6.6. Optimal consumption-saving decision with social security
system. Effects of an increase in social security contributions (solid
line).

Exercises

1.  Using the "ICM-6-2.xls" spreadsheet, study the effects of an
    increase in the consumption tax to 20%. How the optimal household
    decisions are affected by this tax change?

2.  Analyze the effects of a change in the parameter γ, using the
    "ICM-6-2.xls" spreadsheet. How the different fiscal revenues change?
    How is the sensitivity of the optimal decisions by the households to
    the tax rates depending on the value of this parameter.

3.  Suppose that the interest rate changes to a 3 percent, R = 0.03.
    What consequences does it have on the distortionary effects of
    taxation on the consumption-savings decision and the
    consumption-leisure decision?

4.  Using the "ICM-6-2.xls" spreadsheet, study the effects of a decline
    in the labor income tax.

5.  Using the "ICM-6-3.xls" spreadsheet, study how changes in the
    discount factor affects the incidence of the social security system
    on the household consumption-saving optimal decision.

6.  Introduce the optimal labor supply decision into the household’s
    utility function and study how are the distortionary effects on
    labor supply by the social security system.

7. The firm and the investment decision: The Tobin’s Q model

7.1. Introduction

Another fundamental economic agent that is included in dynamic general
equilibrium models is the firm. Firms, together with households, make up
the two main economic agents which determine the behavior of an economy
through in micro-based macroeconomic models. The firms represent the
productive sector of the economy, that is, they are the economic agents
that produce the final goods that are consumed or invested, by taking
decisions about the demand of productive factors. To produce the final
good, firms use a certain number of productive factors, given a
technology function, which allows their transformation into final
production. We consider the existence of two types of productive
factors: physical capital and labor. Physical capital arises as a
consequence of consumers savings decisions. In its simplest and
traditional version, this saving is supposed to be equal to investment,
which is transformed directly into physical capital, and in general it
is assumed that the owner of the capital stock is the household, who
rent production factors to the firms. On the other hand, the labor
factor is derived from the time endowment of households. Households have
an initial discretionary time endowment that can be used either for
leisure activities or for working activities. Labor is just the time
that households rent to firms. In the standard framework, firms rent
productive factors to the households, which we assume are the owners of
them, receiving a return. This makes the decision problem of firms very
simple, since it is the households who make the decisions of labor
supply and investment. This is the treatment that is given to firms in
the majority of micro-based dynamic macroeconomic models, in which the
existence of perfect competition is assumed. If the existence of
imperfect competition (monopolistic competition) is introduced, the
problem of the companies is more complex since they have some market
power to influence the price of the produced goods.

In studying optimal decisions by the firms, we assume that their
objective function is profits maximization, subject to the technological
restriction that is defined by the production function. Thus, the
behavior of firms will be represented by an optimization problem in
which a vector of quantities (demand) of productive factors is
determined, given their prices and, through the technological function,
determines the level of production of the economy. The key variable we
analyze in this chapter is the investment decision. Along with
consumption, investment is the other fundamental variable of an economic
system. As we have seen in the study of households decisions, they
determine the level of optimal savings in each period, savings that we
assume are transformed directly into investment and physical capital.
Investment is important since it determines both the level of employment
and the possibilities of growth of the economy. In the classical
analysis, firms do not own the capital whose accumulation process is
determined by savings, which is the instrument that consumers use to
determine their optimal consumption path. In this sense, saving is
simply production not consumed, so that investment decisions are derived
directly from savings decisions. This is the assumption generally
adopted by most micro-based models. However, this means that we cannot
adequately define an investment function for physical capital, or define
what are its determinants independently of the optimal saving decision
in the form of financial assets.

In this chapter, we analyze the investment from the point of view of the
firms. Thus, we assume that firms own their physical capital and,
therefore, are the ones that make investment decisions using consumer
savings as a source of financing. In this case, we would distinguish
between consumers, on the one hand, and entrepreneurs, on the other, the
latter being the owners of the firms and, therefore, the owner of the
physical capital, representing the economic agent that makes the
investment decisions. By using this alternative specification, we can
separate the saving decision from the investment decision and thus,
obtain the investment demand in a dynamic environment, since the
investment decision today, will affect the future flow of profits of the
firms, in a way equivalent to how consumers determine their level of
savings today and their future level of consumption.

In the standard neoclassical model, the optimal capital stock is
determined as a function of the relative prices of the productive
factors. However, we expand this basic analysis considering the
existence of adjustment costs associated with the investment process.
Based on this analysis, we will develop the Tobin’s Q model, which will
constitute the framework of reference that we will use to describe
investment decisions in an economy. In Tobin’s Q model, the optimal
investment rate depends on a ratio, called Q, defined as the ratio of
the market value of the company to the replacement cost of installed
capital. The resulting model will consist of a discrete-time system
composed of two difference equations, which determine the behavior of
that ratio and the stock of capital. However, these equations have a
non-linear nature, so analyzing the behavior of the system directly is
more complex because it cannot be written in matrix notation. In this
case, we proceed in the first place to obtain a linear approximation to
the non-linear equations of the same, rewriting the model in terms of
the deviations of each variable with respect to its steady-state value,
which will allow analyzing its behavior through the eigenvalues
associated with the system and obtain the corresponding stable saddle
path.

The structure of the rest of the chapter is as follows. In Section 2, we
solve analytically Tobin’s Q model, describing the intertemporal problem
of profit maximization of the firms, the definition of the profit
function to be used, as well as the description of the adjustment costs
associated with the investment process. Section 3 performs the
calibration of the model, as well as the calculation of its steady
state. Section 4 carries out the log-linearization of the model, a
necessary step to proceed with its numerical resolution. Section 5
presents the numerical resolution of the model, as well as the
calculation of the readjustment in the expectations on the ratio Q.
Section 6 carries out a disturbance analysis, while in Section 7 a
